[rocprofiler-systems] Add OpenMP profiling doc (#5867)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/openmp-profiling.rst

   The steps in this section also apply to C/C++ programs.

For this example, we will be using the `jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers example <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/tree/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/examples/hpc/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers>`_.

Building the example
---------------------------------------------

This example uses ``amdflang`` as the Fortran compiler. To begin, clone the ``rocm-systems`` repository and sparse checkout the necessary examples.

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone --no-checkout --filter=blob:none --depth=1 --branch develop https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems.git
    cd rocm-systems
    git sparse-checkout init --cone
    git sparse-checkout set projects/rocprofiler-systems/examples
    git checkout develop

Build only the ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers`` example

.. code-block:: shell

    rm -rf build-hpc
    cmake -S projects/rocprofiler-systems/examples/hpc \
        -B build-hpc \
        -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=/opt/rocm
    cmake --build build-hpc --target jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers
    export JACOBI_FORTRAN_BIN=$PWD/build-hpc/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers
    cd ..

> The resulting binary is at ``rocm-systems/build-hpc/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers``.

Author: Not needed. This is to return out of the `cd rocm-systems` that was done in the previous command.

.. meta::
    :description: ROCm Systems Profiler OpenMP performance profiling, including Fortran offloading support
    :keywords: rocprof-sys, rocprofiler-systems, ROCm, tips, how to, profiler, tracking, OpenMP, OMPT, AMD, Offload, Fortran

**************************************************************************

> OpenMP performance profiling for C/C++/Fortran host and offload programs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenMP performance profiling
```

Can the title be shortened, and the specific info " for C/C++/Fortran host and offload programs" be mentioned in the description section?

**************************************************************************

> `ROCm Systems Profiler <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/tree/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems>`_ supports profiling of OpenMP programs on ROCm 6.4.0 or higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ROCm Systems Profiler <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-systems/en/latest/index.html>`_ supports profiling OpenMP programs starting with ROCm 6.4.0.
```

> OpenMP performance data is captured by intercepting callbacks generated by the OpenMP Tools Interface (OMPT) using `ROCprofiler-SDK <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/tree/develop/projects/rocprofiler-sdk>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It captures OpenMP performance data by intercepting callbacks from the OpenMP Tools Interface (OMPT) using `ROCprofiler-SDK <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocprofiler-sdk/en/latest/>`_.
```

> The minimum ROCm version of 6.4.0 is required as this is the version where ROCprofiler-SDK introduced support for OMPT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROCm 6.4.0 is the minimum required version, as this release introduced OMPT support in ROCprofiler-SDK.
```

Only a subset of OMPT callbacks are processed. The list of supported callbacks can be viewed by running the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

    rocprof-sys-avail --list-operations ompt

.. note::

    On versions prior to ROCm 7.14, ``--list-operations ompt`` is not available.
    The list of supported callbacks can instead be obtained by generating a
    configuration file with:

    .. code-block:: shell

        rocprof-sys-avail -G config.cfg --categories settings::rocprofiler-sdk --all --advanced

>     and inspecting the ``ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_OMPT_OPERATIONS`` entry in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    After the configuration file ``config.cfg`` is generated, inspect the ``ROCPROFSYS_ROCM_OMPT_OPERATIONS`` entry.

>     generated ``config.cfg``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Profiling a Fortran program that uses GPU offloading
=====================================================

.. tip::

   The steps in this section also apply to C/C++ programs.

For this example, we will be using the `jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers example <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/tree/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/examples/hpc/jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers>`_.

> Building the example

Reviewer: Suggest changing this section to numbered steps.

Author: Done.

By default, a ``.proto`` trace file containing all captured traces from the profiling session is written under this directory.

.. tip::

    More information about presets can be found in the :doc:`Using preset profiles <using-preset-profiles>` documentation.

Understanding the proto file output
-----------------------------------------------

To view the generated ``.proto`` file in a browser, open the `Perfetto UI page <https://ui.perfetto.dev/>`_. Then, click on ``Open trace file`` and select the ``.proto`` file.
The output trace should resemble the following image:

.. image:: ../data/openmp-profiling/perfetto-jacobi-initial-view.png
    :alt: Initial view of the Perfetto trace file
    :width: 800

To view the collected traces, click on the drop-down arrow in the ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers`` track. You will then be able to see the full trace, which should resemble:

.. image:: ../data/openmp-profiling/perfetto-jacobi-tracks-view.png
    :alt: Expanded view of the proto file showing tracks and the collected events
    :width: 800

.. tip::
    You can pin important tracks in Perfetto by hovering over the track name and clicking the pin icon.

> Multiple tracks are displayed, each representing different information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple tracks are displayed, each representing different information, such as:
```

> 1. Shows the events captured on the main thread. The main program is executed here (represented by the trace labelled ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Events captured on the main thread. The main program is executed here (represented by the trace labelled ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers``).
```

> 2. Shows GPU kernel executions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GPU kernel executions.
```

> 3. Shows memory copy operations between agents (CPU/GPU).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Memory copy operations between agents (CPU/GPU).
```

> 4. Shows the power being used by the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Power being used by the GPU.
```

> 5. Measures graphics engine utilization as a percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Graphics engine utilization (in percentage).
```

> 6. Measures multimedia engine activity as a percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Multimedia engine activity (in percentage).
```

> 7. Measures VRAM consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* VRAM consumption.
```

> 8. Shows GPU temperature in Celsius.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GPU temperature (in Celsius).
```

> 9. Measures memory controller utilization as a percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Memory controller utilization (in percentage).
```

> For this example, the important tracks are ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers`` (1), ``GPU Kernel Dispatch`` (2), and ``GPU Memory Copy to Agent`` (3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, the important tracks are ``jacobi-fortran-targetdata-markers``, ``GPU Kernel Dispatch`` , and ``GPU Memory Copy to Agent``.
```

Author: Following our discussion, I will be keeping the numbers.
